The dirty open secret in the history of western prosperity is Steve McQueen's subject: unabolished and unchallenged slavery. Specifically, it is the slavery that thrived in an American era habitually known by an opaque Latinism: antebellum, although this is a story from the cold civil war that preceded the hot one. 12 Years a Slave is adapted by screenwriter and novelist John Ridley from the 1853 memoir by Solomon Northup, a black man born free in New York state, tricked, drugged and kidnapped in Washington DC and then sold in chains into slavery in the south. Chiwetel Ejiofor gives a performance of incomparable heroism and presence as Northup; Lupita Nyong'o is passionate and defiant in the role of his fellow prisoner Patsey, and Michael Fassbender is the sadistic slavemaster Epps, whose habitual sexual abuse and angry self-hate is revealed to be a pathological and under-reported part of the system; a system, which in the words of one character, enables the abuser's violence to "trample his guilty sensation".

The appearance of this film coincides with an upsurge in the debate about Hollywood's traditional reticence on the subject of slavery's everyday existence; recently, it has taken iconoclasts and pulp provocateurs such as Quentin Tarantino and Lars von Trier to break the tactful, diplomatic hush with refreshingly tasteless pictures such as Django Unchained (2012) and Manderlay (2005). Victor Fleming's stupendous epic Gone With the Wind (1939) always looked culpably naive historically -- and McQueen's movie has made that perspective even clearer -- but perhaps no more culpable than the placidly apolitical, ahistorical output of modern white Hollywood. For me, the most startling film on the subject of recent times is The Yes Men (2003), which showed the anticapitalist pranksters sneaking into corporate conventions to give presentations praising 21st century globalised outsourced workforces because they are cheaper than slavery. The zero-wage-bill model is outdated because it leaves the employer hopelessly exposed to board, lodging and security costs.

McQueen's previous films were called Hunger and Shame; there is plenty of both in this almost unwatchably shocking and violent film. The beatings and lynchings are represented with uncompromising brutality and force. As much as anything, each use of the N-word is another turn of the screw. Here is the word reconnected to its past, to all its hateful hinterland. Here is what the word actually means and does.

12 Years a Slave has all of McQueen's effortlessly powerful visual sense, all his determination to look at ugly realities head-on. I sat down to this movie expecting to see one of the long, fixed camera-position takes, in medium- or long-shot, which McQueen has made such a brilliant signature with his cinematographer Sean Bobbitt. But there isn't one. Or not quite. We get a superbly composed, continued shot of Solomon's wondering face after a fateful conversation with a sympathetic carpenter Bass, played by Brad Pitt, and we see hope and fear and loss register with him, along with a new realisation of all that he has endured. It is a bravura performance from Ejiofor and McQueen. But there isn't the same icy, eerie effect; the sense of steely, refrigerated technique isn't as prominent. There is a new passion and moral force in the film; a new tragic grandeur.

McQueen's visual acuity and flair, and the ferocity of those images, might expose him to charges of fetishism. But this is to miss the point of what this film does. It certainly forces you to see, but in a different sense. The structure of the narrative defamiliarises the condition of slavery and the slave trade, gives it a shocking visibility. Northup is conned, captured, chained, bound in a slave ship -- just as normal, but all within the borders of the US. History is happening to him and us in microcosm. Northup is an educated, refined man, a man with a wife and children, a free man; his being in slavery is a grotesque mistake, a terrible injustice. We can see it only too clearly. But McQueen is making us see the point is that they are all free -- or should be. They are all dignified human beings with families. Northup's sensational situation is only an amplification and distillation of the whole crime.

It is a triumph for everyone involved, and McQueen's career trajectory is thrilling: early work in video art, a famous pastiche of Buster Keaton, a study of hunger strikers, an investigation of sex addiction, and now a pioneering drama about American slaves: the political prisoners of history and race. It takes the blood, sweat, tears and physicality of his former preoccupations and goes beyond: an essay in outrage and injustice, and a visualisation of an end to tyranny. It is a modern classic.