The United Kingdom Anti-Doping Agency has launched an investigation into allegations contained in a documentary that a doctor claimed to have doped three unnamed British athletes while they were training in Kenya.

Ukad confirmed that it had sent two investigators to assess the claims made by the German TV channel ARD and the Sunday Times, which it said were of "grave concern and of significant interest".

The documentary appeared to show boxes of the blood booster EPO and syringes in a bin on the premises of the High Performance Training Centre where elite athletes from around the world, including from Britain, base themselves while altitude training in Iten.

However, in a statement Pieter Langerhorst, who owns the centre with his wife Lornah Kiplagat, said they had a firm zero tolerance policy on drugs.

"We have installed 16 cameras to monitor the camp," Langerhorst told The Observer. "If we have any concerns about athletes, we immediately report the athlete to the IAAF who will normally test the athlete that same day. We have no refrigerators in any of the rooms so no one can keep EPO in their rooms."

The documentary also used hidden camera footage obtained by a member of the ARD team posing as an athlete, who was apparently being offered EPO by two doctors in Iten.

In the footage, one of the doctors claimed to have supplied "more than 50" athletes including three Britons, based on his guarantee that he could dramatically improve their performances in "three months".

He added: "Even if the athletes are subjected to doping tests they will find nothing. That is what the top level athletes take." When approached on the record in the documentary, he retracted his comments.

The programme did not name any names, or give an indication as to whether the athletes in question were elite performers or recreational runners, or when the alleged doping took place.

A statement from UK Athletics called the allegations "vague and unsubstantiated" and said that "none of the allegations as presented relating to British athletes accords with our experience". The body added that "none of the doctors featured in the film are known by us, or have treated our athletes".

The statement continued: "A number of British athletes have attended the high altitude training camp at Iten in the past seven years under UKA's supervision. We are confident that in the operation of our altitude trips, all reasonable measures are taken to ensure the safety and security of our athletes."

Meanwhile, the Ukad chief executive, Nicole Sapstead, said that while she could not give full details of its investigation, she could "confirm that this evidence is being treated with the utmost importance and urgency, and two members of Ukad staff are currently in Kenya pursuing a number of lines of inquiry".

Seperately, over the past three years more than 40 Kenyan athletes have failed doping tests, but the country had promised it was getting its act together when it passed a new law making it a criminal act to either dope or supply such products last month.

Japhter Rugut, head of the newly established Kenyan anti-doping agency, told ARD the allegations were "very shocking". He said: "We can see that we have a lot of problems at grassroots level and we will work with the police so as to weed out all those implicated in these criminal activities, both sports people and doctors, who will have to answer for their actions."